Developers Information for STONIX
=================================

0. Overview
---------------------------------

  STONIX is an operating system configuration hardening tool for Unix and Unix 
  like (e.g. Linux) operating systems. This tool implements a hybrid of 
  guidance from NSA, DISA STIGs, USGCB and the CIS. To as great of a degree as 
  possible each guidance element for each platform is evaluated on the other 
  platforms for applicability and applied if possible and sensible.
  
  The STONIX program is a modular codebase implemented in Python (currently 
  using the 2.x dialect, a port to Python 3.0 is in future planning). Python
  was selected due to it being part of the default install on all target 
  platforms. The program is primarily a command-line utility but there is a
  robust GUI built in. The GUI is implemented in PyQt.
  
  STONIX uses some common design patterns including Model View Controller, 
  Factory, and Observable.
  
1. STONIX Components
---------------------------------
  STONIX is comprised of the following major components:
  
  1. The controller, stonix.py. The controller is the core of the program and 
    dictates the core program logic.
    
  2. The environment, environment.py. The environment object is a collection of 
    information about the system on which STONIX is running. It should be viewed
    as a collection of data that is accessed via getters. (We had a significant
    debate over getters vs. raw property access). This object is intended to be
    a singleton largely to prevent the repetition of the data gathering process.
    
  3. The Log Dispatcher, logdispatcher.py. This object at present handles the
    CLI output to console as well as the creation of the human readable and XML
    logs. This object is intended to be a singleton to preserve a unified
    output/logging stream.
    
  4. The Program Arguments object, program_arguments.py. This object handles
    the program arguments from the command line.
    
  5. The Rules, multiple files. The rule objects are the actual implementation
    of the hardening guidance. See the section below on rules and how they work.
    
  6. Helpers, multiple files. The helper objects are common abstractions of
    underlying system functionality. E.G. The Service Helper object abstracts
    the functions of starting, stopping and checking services so that rules
    don't have to worry about whether the system is chkconfig, rc-update,
    svcadm, systemd or launchd. See the section on Helpers for more information.
    
  7. The GUI class, gui.py, main_window.py. This is the GUI. The base GUI was
    created using QT designer and the main_window file is the output from that.
    The gui.py file contains the action logic associated with the gui. Care
    should be taken when working with the GUI as there are multiple threads in
    use during some portions of program execution and cross thread references
    are a shortcut to weird crashes.
    
  8. The Log Importer, LogImporter folder + contents. This is a simple import
    program to import the STONIX XML logs into a database.
    
2. STONIX Code Standards
----------------------------------
  The STONIX dev team largely follows PEP 8 for code formatting standards. We
  do deviate from PEP 8 in the allowance of camelCase variable & method names.
  Code rules that are specific to the STONIX project are:
  
  1. No third party libraries (exception made for the dmidecode library as it's
  essential to the information gathering). This is to simplify code distribution
  and installation.
  
  2. We are trying to move to Test Driven Development. It is expected that any
  code added to STONIX have unit tests (preferably good ones).
  
  3. Error Handling: All modules must deal with errors in a sane fashion.
  For rules this means that errors must be handled and reported. For Helper
  objects usually this means allowing the error to bubble up to the caller so
  that the call stack can be more easily evaluated. Only the STONIX controller
  is permitted to stop execution of the whole program. The controller will
  capture rules that die during initialization or execution.
    
3. STONIX Rules
----------------------------------
  All STONIX rules inherit from a template rule class in the file rule.py. This
  template class defines the interface that the controller uses to talk to all
  of the rules. You should read and understand the template rule class before
  implementing your own rules.
  
  The most important rule of writing rules: All rules must "do the right thing"
  on _all_ platforms. At minimum this means have an accurate dictionary in
  self.applicable and have a constructor that runs correctly on all platforms.
  
  Each concrete rule should override several of the base properties and methods
  of the template. The rulenumber, rulename, helptext, detailedresults,
  applicable properties need to be overridden at minimum. In addition a minimum
  set of methods will need to be overridden: fix, report.
  
  Each rule will have between 0 and n Configuration Items, where n is something
  this side of ridiculous. A Configuration Item is any option made available to
  the user of the STONIX program to tune the behavior of a given rule. The
  simplest is a boolean option that says whether or not the rule should even
  execute it's fix functions. More complex rules may have multiple CIs. CIs are
  documented in more detail below.
  
  More information on helper classes is located below but for rules that boil
  down to editing key/value pairs the rule author may choose to inherit from the
  ruleKVEditor class instead of the base rule template class. ruleKVEditor is a
  template class derived from the base rule template.
  
  There are a couple of process flow requirements expected of rules. The Report
  method of the rule should adjust the value of the boolean property "compliant"
  to reflect whether or not the system accurately implements the guidance
  embodied by the rule. The Fix method should update the rulesuccess and
  currstate properties as needed.
  
  Reading and understanding existing rules is strongly recommended before
  attempting to author one.
  
  Undo is a tricky thing inside STONIX. While there is a desire to be able to
  return the system state back to the way it was before STONIX executed in fix
  mode this can be problematic for a number of reasons. For some rules undo is
  fairly reasonable and the undo method may be overridden and the revertable
  property set to True. There is a helper object called the StateChgLogger that
  can assist with recording and undoing changes. However in many cases,
  particularly when multiple changes are made to a file by different rules or
  the security concern is severe it is acceptable to not offer an Undo option
  for a rule.
  
  Explanation of the intended use of the template Rule properties:
  
  self.config, self.environ, self.statechglogger, self.logdispatch are class
  properties holding the objects passed in at instantiation.
  
  self.rulenumber is a unique identifier for the rule. The only requirements are
  that it be a python int and that it be unique.
  
  self.rulename is a text identifier that is displayed to the user of the
  program. Due to the way that it is used it should be a string of
  alpha-numeric characters with no spaces or specials.
  
  self.mandatory - a boolean flag that indicates whether or not the rule is
  mandatory.
  
  self.helptext - a text string that is displayed to the user vi the UI and
  the configuration file. This should contain information about the rule
  and what it does.
  
  self.executionpriority - a provision inserted into stonix to allow for
  execution of rules in a specific order. This property is unused in v1 and
  below.
  
  self.rootrequired - a boolean flag indicating whether or not the rule
  requires root privileges. If this flag is set to true the rule will not
  display or execute if the program is run as a non-privileged user.
  
  self.configinsimple - the configuration object can write two types of config
  files, full and simple. The simple config contains only settings that are
  expected to be routinely altered. The full config file contains every option
  for that platform. Setting this bool to True will include the CI elements for
  this rule into the simple config.
  
  self.detailedresults - this is feedback text that is shown to the user at
  the end of the rules execution. Due to the way that message flow presently
  works only messages from the Report method are actually displayed. The rules
  report method should initialize the detailedresults and append relevant
  information to that string during their execution.
  
  self.compliant - this status boolean indicates whether or not the current
  system configuration is compliant with the guidance in this rule. This
  property should be updated by the Report method as appropriate.
  
  self.rulesuccess - this status boolean indicates whether or not the fix
  method was successfully executed. It should be updated by the fix method
  as appropriate.
  
  self.databaserule - this boolean indicates whether or not the rule maintains
  a database of results of any sort. Very few rules fall into this category.
  Options were built into the framework to permit a run of a subset of rules
  that maintain databases to update those databases after authorized system
  changes.
  
  self.applicable - this property should contain a correctly formatted
  dictionary for consumption by the isApplicable method in the template rule
  class. Please reference the pydoc string for that method for full
  documentation.
  
  self.revertable - this property indicates whether or not the rule is designed
  to be safely undone via a call to its undo method.
  
  self.confitems - this is a python list of instantiated ConfigurationItem
  objects. Each CI object used by the rule should be appended to this list after
  instantiation.
  
  self.currstate - indicates the current state of the rule. Usually this is a
  text string that is either "notconfigured" or "configured". This property
  should be updated as appropriate.
  
  self.targetstate - indicates the destination state or target state of the
  rule. Typically this uses the same values as currstate. This should be
  updated as appropriate (typically only needs to be updated during the undo).
  
  self.guidance - Python list of source guidance elements covered by the rule.
  E.G. if the rule satisfied CCE 14161-4 you would indicate that by adding
  that as a quoted string list element to this property. This is to support
  future functionality.
  
4. Helpers
-----------------------------------
  STONIX has a number of helper objects for various tasks, and a file of small
  functions not really suited for placing into individual classes. Major helpers
  include the Service Helper (ServiceHelper.py), the Package Helper
  (pkghelper.py), the StateChgLogger, the ConfigurationItem and
  stonixutilityfunctions.
  
  The ServiceHelper abstracts functions having to do with managing services on
  the various target platforms. When instantiated it will determine the
  underlying service management tools and instantiate the appropriate 
  sub-class(es). The rule author needs only to instantiate the ServiceHelper and
  then issue requests to enable, disable or audit services.
  
  The Package Helper abstracts functions having to do with installation,
  removal and checking packages. There are some important limitations with the
  Package Helper that have to do with the underlying packaging systems, or lack
  thereof on some platforms. This helper is far more effective with Linux OS
  systems than it is with macOS (OS X) or Solaris.
  
  The StateChgLogger assists rules that wish to have undo functionality to
  record their changes and unwind them. To make effective use of the
  statechglogger review the pydoc strings, the implementations in existing rules
  and the implementation in the template rule class.
  
  The ConfigurationItem class encapsulates all of the information and behavior
  of STONIX preference items. I.E. the checkboxes in the GUI that control
  program behavior. Please review the documentation strings in the
  configurationitem.py file and the usage in existing rules.
  
  A typical CI would look something like this:
        datatype = 'bool'
        key = 'DISABLEBLUETOOTH'
        instructions = "To prevent the disabling of bluetooth services, " + \
        "set the value of DISABLEBLUETOOTH to False."
        default = True
        self.ci = self.initCi(datatype, key, instructions, default)
        
  In this case we are stating that the data type of the CI is boolean, the
  default value is "True", and the instructions (which are shown to the end 
  user) are as listed. The final call is to the initCi method of the template
  rule class. This method actually invokes the object, appends it to the
  self.configitems property and then returns the instantiated object.
  
  Typical use of the ci then would be in the fix method of the rule:
	if not self.ci.getcurrvalue():
           return
           
  This essentially shortcuts the rule if the CI current value is False.
  
  The stonixutilityfunctions.py module contains small functions that were not
  deemed significant enough to turn into full objects. These functions can be
  accessed by importing the stonixutilityfunctions module.
